---
title: How tall am I?
author: Ross
published: 2015-01-06
mathjax: on
---

So I was thinking just now how heavy air is. I was recalling the study I had seen on facebook the other week that the majority of the mass lost when you 'lose weight' is exhaled as carbon dioxide, as opposed to as extra feces. I checked the research and it's from Australia's own UNSW and published in [BMJ](http://www.bmj.com/content/349/bmj.g7257) so it's probably legit, even if it is a very short 'feature'. The headline figure is that 84% of the mass of adipose triglyceride is exhaled and the rest passed as water. This is of course neglecting the other constituents of the fat cell, but still impressive.

It reminds me of how tree and plants grow by pulling all the carbon they need out of the air. Even though most life of all kinds is made of water, that's still an impressive amount of carbon. It got me thinking, well how much does air weigh anyway? I could quite remember the molar volume of air (the figure in my head turned out to be off by 10x) so I looked it up to be 25 L/mol. Or $(dm)^3/L$ if you're Wikipedia. Then I started doing the molar mass of the gasses, 44 for $CO_2$, 32 for $O_2$ and 28 for $N_2$. Then air is made up of 80% nitorgen and 20% oxygen and almost nothing else, so the mean is 28.8 g/mol. Putting this in a sentence, one mole of air weighs 28.8 g and takes up 25 L of space. Close enough to 1 g/L. What a nice little factoid to tuck away. And not that heavy.

What about the specific amount of carbon though? Looking up the figure, the atmosphere is 0.039% carbon dioxide. So 24.7 L of air contains 0.00039 moles of carbon dioxide, and carbon dioxide is 12 g of carbon per mole *punches into calculator* 0.19 g per cubic metre. Moral: plants have to seive a lot of air to grow.

All this back of the envelope stuff got me wondering would I be able to measure things if I found myself abandoned on a desert isle or, more plausibly, sent back in time. The first thing that came to me is that I am 178 cm tall. If this is true to say 2 cm then that is an accuracy of about 1%, which is an astonishingly good basis for reconstructing the SI system.

A short digression. I would have to measure myself in sand. Then divide in that interval in half to get 89 cm. Then add a centimetre (the width of my fingernail) and third it twice to get 10cm. Then 10cm plus the 90 cm is a metre rule, with 10 cm increments easily added. A quick google just showed me a technique to equally divide a segment into any number of pieces based on making your segment the transverse of two equally divided parallel lines and joining the intervals on the parallel lines.

Next up is mass. Easy, 1 cubic centimeter of water weighs 1 gram. The physics definitions of time would be a little beyond my ability to measure, having no Cs atoms or sensitive laser apparatus. But I think g = 9.8 $m/s^2$ would cut it. One second is the time for a rock to fall 4.9 m. If I was really bored on the island, I would figure out the pendulum equations and do it that way, since then I would have a timer rather than a one off event.

Temperature is both simple and hard. Obviously water freezes at 0 degrees Celsius and boils at 100. But how do you divide that interval? I think I would have to use Newton's law of cooling if I didn't have a vat of mercury around (desert island vs time travel scenario), but then I would need to know the ambient temperature that the water was approaching. One kelvin increment is the same as a degree Celsius, and it starts at absolute zero.

At this point, I realised I had no idea how to start on the electric units; all I remembered was something about a flow of some metal to define the ampere. And so looked it up. An early realisation had it pegged as "the current that would deposit 0.001118000 grams of silver per second from a silver nitrate solution". This is when I came across the news that there is a [proposal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proposed_redefinition_of_SI_base_units) to overhaul the SI system, redefining the ampere and more significantly the kilogram.

I say more significantly the kilogram, because it is the only base unit still defined by an artifact. Despite what I said about a millilitre of water, the standard is actually a metal cylinder in a room in France. Madness. Moreover, there were replicas to be other made and periodically they cross check them for drift. There has been drift, but looking at the chart on wiki just now, I see that's it's only been on the scale of tens of parts per billion, which is comparable to the maximum possible accuracy of the other units. But it has the draw back of you can't calibrate your private lab.

Anyway, they're going to fix the kilogram by declaring a value for the Planck constant, which says how much energy a photon of a particular frequency has. It is currently known to an accuracy 100x greater than the kilograms' drifts. The ampere is to be defined by fixing a value for the fundamental electric charge (but doesn't that make the coulomb primary?), and the kelvin is to be defined by fixing the Boltzmann constant. The latter because apparently the triple point of water definition is unwieldy outside a narrow range of temperatures, and in some fundamental sense, temperature is just an expression of energy anyway.

The most controversial part of the proposal however is to redefine the mole, from its current practical definition to one that comes from a specification of the Avogadro constant. This will break the rule that lies at the very heart of the concept of a mole, that one mole of carbon-12 weighs 12 grams. I think is is being offset by already including a dalton; an atom of carbon-12 weighs 12 daltons. The question of micro-macro conversion then becomes how many dalton in a gram? Previously the answer was Avogradro's number. Why this semantic change which breaks the rationale behind the whole principle of the mole.

If I was a dictator of the world/ a new Napoleon, I would strip the mole out of the fundamental units, ditto to the candela. And switch the primacy of the ampere and the coulomb. Second, metre, coulomb, kilogram as fundamental, things like the mole and the candela (and radian and steradian) as supplemental, as in they are defined through a physical process measured in the other unit, not basic in themselves. and then all the derived units are just expressions with cute names, but no further physical data input.
